In it’s broadest possible sense, music is defined as “organized sound.” This open- 
ended and safe definition is coherent regardless of era, style, culture, or the 
mechanics of musical organization. Each successive historical era produces 
musically artistic expressions of its own time, its own musical aura. The study of 
Music Theory is the means by which we investigate this.
A Definition of Music Theory
Music Theory is the study of music and its organizational characteristics. We define 
and examine aspects of music:
•   How do we perceive music aurally?
•   How do we experience music aesthetically and?
•   How do we symbolize music visually?
Preface
6We learn to associate sound with symbol (or notation), so to increase our ability to 
perceive music at levels of increasing depth and comprehension, both 
experientially and analytically.
The Purpose of Music Theory
The study of the language of music yields three unshakeable tenets:
•   We learn to analyze music in order to gain an understanding of the 
how great composers create. We use it as a “window” into their minds, 
if you will;
•   We learn to analyze music in order to deepen our own understanding, 
either as musicians or consumers of this form of artistic expression.
•   We employ the knowledge gained in the study of music to stimulate 
and enhance our own creativity.
Among the community of musicians, the greater our comprehension, the more 
sublime our interpretation. This creates a more meaningful experience for our 
audience. This is the ultimate focus of the study of music.
As consumers, the more we understand about music, the more refined is our ability 
to intelligently evaluate what we enjoy. It is the intelligent consumer of Art who is 
the greatest supporter of Art.
The Means by which We Investigate Music
Examining music involves evaluation. At any level of experience, this begins with 
personal taste and preference. As we learn more, our method of evaluation evolves, 
becoming both more fluent and more critical. Clearly, over time and study, this 
shapes our perceptions and our tastes, regardless of what general direction these 
may take.
Any study begins with an examination of fundamental precepts or principles. Music 
is no different. The nature of perception, the basic constructs, craftsmanship in 
musical construction: all must be mastered in the study of music.
Two broad approaches are employed in the study of music:
•   Analysis: we learn to employ commonly accepted techniques and 
specialized languagetechniques are a shared analytical language throughout the 
community of musicians. This is conceptual knowledge and evaluation.
•   Composition: either by actively creating our own works, or (more 
likely for the beginner), imitating or emulating the works of earlier 
composers. This is active knowledge and procedure.
Both of these approaches will evolve as the student acquires more knowledge, skill, 
and greater understanding.
How We Perceive Music
At the most primary level, we experience music by five principal distinctive 
characteristics.
•   Pitch: we perceive the sensation of sound (or tone) as relatively high or 
low.
•   Duration: we perceive how much time sound (or silence) occupies.
•   Timbre: we perceive various qualities or “colors” of sound.
•   Intensity: we perceive differences in volume or sound pressure levels.
•   Events in time: we perceive pitch collections (events) in the context of 
musical space (time).
These broad generalized definitions and concepts serve us well as a departure 
point. We can now progress from the general to the specific in our study.